---
title: "Chaos through the lense of a global pandemic"
date: 2020-05-17
tags: [Chaos, Dynamical Systems, Mathematics, Statistics]
excerpt: "Understanding chaotic systems using COVID-19 as an example"
mathjax: True
---

When you hear the word chaos what comes to your mind? Costco on a
Sunday, a prison riot, or maybe even a global pandemic. In mathematics,
chaos has a special meaning and can be summarized by one simple idea.
That some systems may look random, but really are just deterministic
with different starting points. Edward Norton Lorenz, an American
mathematician & meteorologist summed it up nicely: “Chaos is when the
present determines the future, but the approximate present does not
approximately determine the future.” Don’t worry if this is making your
head spin a little bit, we will unpack these ideas with a concrete
example.

The spread of COVID-19 is currently gripping the world, and often one
can feel helpless staying inside. Let’s try to change that by learning
and using some mathematics to understand how COVID-19 may be spreading.
Imagine that the city of Toronto has asked us to help model how many
people will get infected by COVID-19. Now it’s important to note that
this is an incredibly complex question, but we can try to understand it
using a basic model called the logistic map.

The logistic map can be described with the following equation: 

$$Infections_{t+1} = Contagiousness  \times Infections_t(1 - Infections_t)$$

Where $$Infections_{t}$$ is the percentage of
the population that is infected with the disease at a given time t.
While contagiousness is a number between 0 and 4 that describes how many
new people an infected person gives the disease to at each time minus
one. For example, early studies have shown that on average an infected
person transmits COVID-19 to 2.5 new people, so the contagiousness would
be 2.5 - 1 = 1.5. We can visualize the logistic map and its model of
COVID-19 spread with a diagram. We start the model with one out of every
million people initially infected.  

![First Image](/images/first_image.png)

We can see that initially the growth is slow and then it grows
“exponentially” and then tapers off at around 1/3 of the population
being infected after 150 days. In fact, this trend of exponential growth
and then slowing is what many experts believe will happen with COVID-19.
Now, imagine that instead of each infected person giving COVID-19 to 2.5
new people on average, they give it to 4.87 people on average. We might
expect that more people would get infected sooner and then it would
taper off to some percentage of the population higher than 1/3. 

![Second Image](/images/second_image.png)
As we can see, only 15% of the population is infected on the hundredth
day. Incredibly, it seems as though our deterministic equation is
producing something that to the naked eye is random. Now let’s just
slightly change our contagiousness and see what percentage of the
population is infected on the 100th day.

![Third Image](/images/third_image.png)

We can see that if each infected person gives the infection to 4.88
people on average, on the hundredth day 90% of people are infected.
What’s going on here? We changed the contagiousness level by a tiny
amount and then suddenly a hundred days later 90% of the population is
infected vs 15%. What we are witnessing is a perfect example of Edward
Norton Lorenz’s quote, where small changes in initial conditions can
lead to large changes down the line.

It turns out that if we have contagiousness above 3.5 then the logistic
map will exhibit a chaotic nature. In our first example, contagiousness
was 1.5 so the system wasn’t chaotic. However, in the previous two
examples, contagiousness was 3.87 and 3.88 respectively which turned out
to be chaotic systems. It’s important to remember that the
contagiousness level is one less than how many people each person
infects.

If someone saw the previous two examples without any context, they may
think that these are random graphs. However, we know for a fact that
they aren’t random, but rather chaotic. These systems are governed by
determinist equations like the logistic map but can change rapidly
depending on their initial conditions.

Why do we even care about chaos? Well, by recognizing different systems
as chaotic, we can start to analyze them. Otherwise, we may think that
they are just random series and not be able to discover a pattern in
them. While understanding disease spread is an incredibly complicated
task, we can use simple models like the logistic map to get a glimpse at
how they spread.
